=== The Angband Newbie Guide ===

 
=== Basic Training ===
 
Whoooo. You've asked us for a guide to playing Angband? That's
dangerous, as you are about to see...
 
When you load the game, select "Start a new character." Go through the
step-by-step instructions for picking a gender, race, and class. For
your first time, I recommend choosing either a Half-Troll or Dunedain
Warrior. Avoid the magely/priestly types; they're much more difficult
to play. If you want basic information about races and classes, go to
the on-line help (type "?") and read "Creating a Character," number 2
on the list. You should probably read most of the help files here; the
commands list is especially important to someone new to Angband.

After naming your character, you'll start in the town. The various
numbers represent stores, where you can buy new equipment and sell
stuff you've found in the dungeon. The little ">" is a staircase, the
entrance to the dungeon. If you want to know what a specific symbol
stands for, type /, and then the symbol. For instance, if you're
wondering what all the #'s are, type /#, and the game will tell you
that these are walls. You can also (l)ook at an item, feature, or
monster. While looking, pressing space or enter will cycle through the
different "interesting" things in view. There is also a full map
function: type "M." It will bring up a map of the entire area (just a
single screen in the case of the town, but useful later on in the
dungeone). Finally, if you type "L," you can scroll the (full-zoom) map
around the dungeon. In general, you can use M to find areas that look
interesting and L to look at them in detail.

Take a look around the town, but avoid the Mean-Looking Mercenaries and
Battle-Scarred Veterans; they can kill you fairly easily. A note on
shop #7; it's the black market, where very powerful items are sold for
an absolutely ridiculous price.

Be sure to visit shops #1 and #2, the General Store and Armoury,
respectively. At the General Store, buy a cloak and a Brass Lantern,
and a flask of oil or two. Sell your torches. At the Armoury, buy some
of the light armor. Suggested: Hard Leather Boots, a Leather Cap,
Leather Gloves. If a Small Leather Shield is on sale and you can afford
it, buy it.

This should have cleaned out your money. However, if it hasn't, it is
strongly recommended that you go to the Alchemist's shop (#5) and
purchase a scroll of Phase Door. If you get surrounded by monsters,
read it, and you'll be teleported a short distance away.

Of course, it's possible that these items will not be available in the
stores. The stores will "refresh" themselves every once in a while,
getting rid of old items and buying new ones. If you ever find that
there's something you need which the stores don't currently have, you
can wait a while for the stores to refresh.

Angband's not actually all that difficult to learn to play. You should
get the hang of it fairly quickly.
 
From here on I'll be giving detailed dungeon survival information.
Some of it is intuitive, and some of it you aren't likely to find out
without a lot of deaths first. If you want to experience the painful
learning process in all it's glory, don't read further. If, however,
you're sick and tired of dying, read ahead.
 
=== On weapons and multiple blows ===

When you start a new character that is a fighter type (warrior,
paladin, ranger, or rogue), you have the possibility of getting more
than one attack with your weapon. Whether or not you get multiple blows
is determined by your weapon weight, your Strength, and your Dexterity.
If you can get a high enough Strength and Dexterity (both over 18; use
the autoroller), then buy a light weapon, like a Whip or a Dagger.
Check your Character display (type "C"). Somewhere on this page, there
is a number that is your number of blows/round. Hopefully, this will be
above 1. If it is, you can sell your original weapon.

Multiple blows become very important later in the dungeon. The more
times you hit, the more damage your weapon does (obviously). What is
not so obvious is the fact that at multiple blows, your magical
enchantments to damage kick in many more times than with just one blow
(see the section on the meaning of the numbers in your equipment). If
you have 4 attacks with a Whip (not impossible), you get 4*1d6 damage
from the damage dice. However, if the Whip has, say, +3 to damage, you
also get 4*3 extra damage on top of the damage dice.

 
=== On important magical items ===

You might think that you can get by without magical items. If so,
you're bound for an interesting, but short, stay in the dungeon. It'll
probably be one-way, too.

The most important items have be be teleportation. There are two types
of teleportation items: Phase Door and Teleport. The former teleports
you a short distance away, and is useful for escaping in battle when
you want to stay somewhat close to your enemy (and is the basis for the
Shoot'n Scoot maneuver; more on this later). The latter will teleport
you across the dungeon. This has the unfortunate effect of sometimes
landing you next to an angry monster, but it's better than certain
death. Once you get to about level 10, be sure you always have several
(at least 10) Scrolls of Phase Door. After about level 15, carry
Teleportation scrolls/staves. This are harder to get, because the
Alchemist (shop #5) doesn't carry them, but you can sometimes find them
in the Black Market.

The second most important items are those of healing. Healing, in this
case, covers Cure Light/Serious/Critical Wounds, Healing, *Healing*,
and Life Potions, from weakest to strongest.

The Cure potions in general are not meant to restore hitpoints. In
fact, Cure Light Wounds will generally restore so few hitpoints that,
due to monster attacks during the round in which you quaff the potion,
you'll have had a net loss of hitpoints.

However, the Cure potions (at least, Cure Serious and Cure Critical) do
remove other bad effects. They will cure poison and cuts, and Cure
Criticals will remove blindness and confusion as well.

Potions of Healing, *Healing*, and Life you won't see for quite some
time. Healing restores 300 HPs, and removes all temporary bad effects,
except possibly for fear. *Healing* does the same, except it restores
1000 HPs. Potions of Life basically fix everything wrong with you; they
restore 5000 HP (about 5 times as much as you'll ever have), restore
all drained stats, restore experience, and remove every bad temporary
effect you have.

There are various methods of Identify which you *need*. Identify comes
in the form of scrolls, Staffs of Perception, Rods of Perception, the
spell Identify, and the prayer Perception. These will tell you any
magical properties of the item, like magical bonuses to hit and to
damage, and magical bonuses to stats. It also tells you if the item is
cursed. It tells you what a wand/rod/staff/potion/scroll/mushroom/etc.
does, and this is very important. There are nasty potions deep in the
dungeon that you *do not* want to drink! Sometimes, the descriptions of
the items are a little obscure; things like Staves of Holiness and
Power, Mushrooms of Unhealth, and others. You may have to experiment a
bit to determine their powers. 

There is also an advanced form of Identify, in scroll form only, called
*Identify*. It tells you every single property of an item, like whether
or not it lets you see invisible monsters, sustains stats, gives you
regeneration, and so on. You should only use these on artifacts or the
high-level ego-items (Westernesse, Holy Avenger, Defender, Elvenkind).

Notes on lighting: You can't do much without light. You won't be able
to see most monsters, cast spells or read scrolls, or, in general, see
the dungeon. There are items which will light up the dungeon, but only
parts of it. Any item/spell of Light or Illumination will light up the
room you are standing it (or part of the corridor). A potion of
Enlightenment/the prayer Clairvoyance will light up the entire level.

Finally, the most useful magical item in general is a Scroll of
Word-of-Recall (often abbreviated WoR). When you are in the town and
read it, you are teleported to the lowest level you have been to in the
dungeon. When read in the dungeon, you are teleported to the town. The
activation takes place about 50 turns after reading the scroll, so it's
not a perfect escape method.
 
=== On Resistances ====

There are many different kinds of attacks in Angband, generally falling
under physical, magical, and breath attacks. They can all cause
specialized kinds of damage, which can kill a character if he/she does
not have resistance to that attack. There are many different attacks
which have corresponding resistances. There are three basic types:
"low" and "high" elemental, and magical. The low elements are acid,
electricity, fire, and cold. The high elements are poison, light, dark,
shards, confusion, sound, nether, nexus, chaos, and disenchantment.
The magical resistances are blindness, fear, free action, and hold
life. Resistances are provided by items and by racial characteristics.
For instance, High Elves automatically resist light effects. Dwarves
resist blindness (you can read about these in the Creating a Character
section of the on-line help). There are certain types of items that
provide the basic (low) four resistances . These are Defender weapons,
Robes of Permanence, armors of Resistance and Elvenkind, and Shields of
Resistance. Many artifacts also provide some or all of the basic
resistances, and also perhaps one or two "high" resistances.

Resistances generally chop off a significant amount of damage, ranging
from 1/5 to 2/3. Also, it is possible to doubly resist the basic four
resistances and poison. When you doubly resist these, damage is chopped
to 1/9. Double resistance is NOT having two permanent sources of the
same resist! Double resistance is having both a permanent source and a
temporary source. Multiple permanent sources do nothing for you.
Resistances are vital to survival in the dungeon. For instance, the
most powerful of fire dragons, the Great Hell Wyrm, can breath fire
(big suprise). Unresisted, the damage caused is 1600 HPs worth; more
than enough to kill the mightiest of warriors (if he's lucky, a warrior
might top out at about 1200 HPs at level 50). However, if you have fire
resistance, this is chopped to 1/3-533 damage. If you doubly resist the
breath, the damage is a paltry 178 HP.
 
=== On Important Depths ===

There are certain depths in the dungeon beyond which it is important to
have a certain resist or attribute. The depths given here are
guidelines, and should not be taken literally. However, if you decide
to go past the depth without the attribute, be very careful and don't
complain if you get the dreaded "It breathes -more- You are dead"
message.

1000': Free Action, See Invisible
1250': Basic four Resistances
1900': Maxxed Stats, Confusion Resistance, Blindness Resistance
2000': Poison Resistance
2500': Hold Life
2700': Chaos Resistance, Nether Resistance
3000': Permanent and Temporary Speed of +20 or greater
4000': Permanent + Temporary Speed of +30 or greater
4950': As much as you can get. Sustains, Speed, every resistance, 
 
Notes: If you have high infravision, you can probably hold off on See
Invisible for a few levels. Not very many, however; Ghosts start
showing up soon, and they're cold-blooded.

Without Free Action you are very dead. Carrion Crawlers (among other
monsters) have a melee paralyzation attack, which can keep you immobile
until death. Also, monsters start getting the paralyze spell about
here. Nothing is more aggravating than watching a puny monster slowly
kill your character as you watch, helpless.

Confusion and Blindness resistance are vital. If you have these, you
can rely on scrolls of Teleportation to get you out of any situation.
Before this, you need Staves of Teleportation which can be activated
when blinded or confused, although with a decent failure rate. Scrolls
are fail-safe.

Hold Life is very nice, but not important. If you can't get it, carry
lots of Potions of Restore Life Levels.

Chaos Resistance is *vital*. It also covers Confusion Resistance. 
 
=== On Secret Doors ===

Throughout the dungeon, many doors are hidden from view. To find them,
use the (S)earch command, which toggles on and off the Searching mode.
However, it is often difficult enough just knowing where to search.
Usually, situations like this will have secret doors (walls containing
secret doors are marked by *s):
 
#*###  ###'###  ####*#    ###*###
*@...  ..'@'..  ..@'.*    ..'@...
#*###  ###*###  ####'#    #######
 
In general, if you see a door all on it's own in a corridor, there are
usually others nearby. If you find a corner in a corridor with two
doors, look for more. Intersections often have some secret doors.
Finally, secret doors will never be in a situation where you have to
move diagonally to open them. The dead-end situation (the first one)
usually does have a secret door, but not always. If you search for a
while and don't find anything, just give up and move on. Sometimes a
dead end will occur near the end of a map, where there is no room to
have a continuing corridor, and so no secret door is generated.
 
=== On the Maximise/Preserve modes ===

These are selected on or off at character creation, and cannot be
changed after that.

Maximise mode: with Maximise mode off, your statistics max out at
18/100, without outside magical effects, like a Ring of Strength. When
Maximise mode is on, where your stats max out at is determined by your
race and class. For instance, any Mage has -5 to Strength. A Human
Mage's strength (Humans have no racial stat differences), therefore,
eould max out at 18/50, instead of 18/100. However, Mages also have +3
to Intelligence. A Human Mage's Intelligence would max out at 18/130.
When Maximise mode is off, it is possible to achieve higher starting
stats for characters; a Gnomish Mage might be able to start with 18/80
Intelligence. However, since your stats can't reach as high levels,
the end game is harder than with Maximise mode on.

Preserve mode: with Preserve mode off, if a level is created with an
artifact on it, and you don't get that artifact, it is gone forever.
When Preserve mode is on, you always can find the artifact again.
However, you lose the "special" level feeling (more below). 
 
=== On Level Feelings ===

When you enter a level, you recieve a feeling giving you a vague idea
how good the level is. These feelings range from "boring" to Superb.
The better the feeling, the better the items on the level, and the more
difficult the monsters. Each unusual item or monster bumps up the
rating of the level a bit. An item or monster is considered unusual if
it is out of depth [normally occurs at a lower depth; for instance, a
Longsword has a base level of 20, and would be considered unusual
anywhere above that level (although not below it)]. Items can be out of
depth without necessarily being anything special; a normal, non-magical
katana could provoke a high level feeling at low depths, because it is
so unusual. Also, pits (large rooms filled with a single type of
monster) and vaults (dense, dangerous rooms with many out of depth
monsters and items) can cause high level feelings. There is also a
Special feeling, available only to players with Preserve mode off,
which tells the player that there is an artifact on the level (most of
the time. Sometimes, especially in the earlier levels, a monster pit or
a vault will often trigger a special feeling). Also, if you have not
spent enough time on the previous level before entering the new one,
you get the feeling "Looks like any other level" which gives you no
information whatsoever.
 
=== On weapons and armor ===

Your equipment will always carry around little numbers that tell you
how effective it is. Armors take this form:
 
A Foobar (+x, +y) [a, +b] (+c)
 
Weapons take this form:
 
A Foobaz XdY (+x, +y) [a, +b] (+c)
 
When unidentified, armors will show just this:
 
[a]
 
Weapons will show this:
 
XdY
 
(+x, +y). This is the item's magical bonuses to hit and to damage,
respectively. These are added to whatever other bonuses you have when
you attack. Some armors have bonuses to hit or to damage, but they are
exclusively artifacts. Many body armors have a small negative number
before the base armor bonus (see below); this is a penalty to hit (the
armor is so heavy that you have trouble moving around in it). However,
this penalty is small enough for all but the youngest of characters to
ignore. 

Rings of Damage or Accuracy have a single (+y) or (+x). When worn, they
affect your damage done/chance to hit in melee battle. They do not
affect missile combat. 

[a, +b]. This is the item's base armor class and magical bonus to
armor. The higher, the better. While theoretically, a weapon could
provide a base armor bonus, none of them do, and only a few weapons
have a magical bonus to armor.

Rings of Protection have a single [+b], which increases your AC. They
are also practically worthless; the valuable ring slot is almost
certainly better off being used for something else.

(+c). This is the item's magical bonus to other statistics: Strength,
Intelligence, Wisdom, Constitution, Dexterity, Charisma, Speed,
Searching, Infravision, Might (Extra Might adds to the multiplier on a
bow, crossbow, or sling), Shots, Attacks, and Tunneling. Not on every
item, it is generally a good reason to choose the item. [Note that it
does not affect every stat in this list! Most items that have a +c only
affect one or two of these stats. Some items affect more (A Weapon of
Westernesse affects Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution)].
 
As a side note for the above: Angband follows the parenthesis for any
item. If you see a number in brackets, like this: [b], it is a bonus to
AC. If it is in parenthesis, like this: (+x), it is either a bonus to a
stat or to hit/damage (and which should normally be obvious by the name
of the item). For instance, a Holy Avenger (a powerful ego-item), looks
like this:
 
A Mace (Holy Avenger) (2d4) (+7, +5) [+4] (+1)
 
Thus, it rolls 2 four-sided dice when attacking, has +7 to hit and +5
to damage, increases your AC by 4, and increases a stat (In this case
Wisdom) by 1.
 
XdY. This is the weapon's base damage. When you successfully hit a
monster, X number of Y-sided dice are rolled. This number represents
the amount of damage you do to the monster before magical bonuses. A
Longsword, for example, rolls 2 five-sided dice (2d5) when you hit a
monster.
 
=== On Slays ===

Many weapons you find in the dungeon are considered to be particularly
deadly against a type of creature. These qualities are collectively
known as slays. They double, triple, or multiply by five *the damage
done by the damage dice*. They DO NOT affect bonuses to damage. Thus,
while slays may play an important part in the early game (especially if
you find a weapon of Slay Orc), in the later part of the game, where
magical bonuses to damage all but take over combat, slays play a very
minor role.
 
=== On the Monster Memory ===

In many other games, you are required to take notes on monster's
weaknesses, strengths, spells, et cetera. Angband takes care of this
for you, with the handy Monster Memory. Every time you find out
something new about a monster, like that it can breathe fire, this is
added to your knowledge of the monster. To look over this knowledge,
type /, then the symbol of the monster. You may have to scroll through
other monster memories to get to the one you're looking for. [Note: you
can set a window to display the monster memory at the preferences
screen (see below). This window will then automatically update as you
fight monsters].
 
=== On the Colors of MonsterS ===

You can often determine some information about a monster based solely
on it's color. This would be the color it is described as, like "a
White Dragon," not the color of it's image on the screen (you can't
rely on a white "p" to be a cold based monster! It will probably be a
paladin or some such). In general, White monsters are cold-based, Red
are fire-based, Blue are electrical, Black is acidic, and Yellow/Green
are poisonous. A Multi-Hued monster is all of these. Crimson monsters
can cause weakness.
 
 
=== On the Preferences ===

The preferences screen is reached by typing "=". It contains many
different preferences that make Angband more enjoyable. There are a few
that I would recommend. Turn both stacking options ON. This maximizes
your treasure collection. Turn the Low Hitpoint Warning ON, and place
the warning percent at about 50%. You'll see the effects of this
whenever you start to die:). The Delay Factor determines how long it
takes for special effects to "move;" that is: balls exploding, bolts
moving, missile weapons flying, et cetera. This is machine dependant;
I usually set mine at about 3 or 4. The Window Flags screen allows you
to set various windows (assuming your platform supports them) to show
certain things. Using this, you can set some windows to always show
monster memory, your character's inventory and/or equipment, a dungeon
map, and others.
 
=== On the Autoscummer ===

Available in the Preferences screen, the autoscummer keeps generating
levels until it comes across one that is interesting, meaning that it
has a decent level feeling. At shallow depths, it doesn't do much,
because it's very hard to generate out of depth monsters and items.
Some people consider it cheating, but keep in mind that, along with
better items, the autoscummer brings nastier monsters, and the monsters
generally outweigh the items. The autoscummer becomes more effective
at lower depths.
 
=== On Death ===

Death in Angband is permanent. Saving in Angband is meant only to let
you pick up where you left off; if you die, your savefile is marked.
The next time you try to use the savefile, you will get the new
character dialogue. Ancestors of dead characters will retain their
monster memory and preferences. Many people here have characters like
"Yuppy XIV"; people die very often in Angband.

Some people make backup savefiles; if their character dies, they simply
load the older character, and pick up where they left off. They lose
what happened after making the backup, but they're alive. However, this
is considered cheating of the highest degree. The only really legal
reason to use savefile abuse ("savefile scumming") is if your computer
crashed or some other external problem killed your character.

There is an option in the Cheating menu in the preferences which
allows you to cheat death. However, like all the other cheating
options, it invalidates your high-score and makes it impossible to
truly win the game.
 
=== Advanced techniques for killing monsters ===

Pillardancing. Requires that you be at least twice as fast as the
monster you are fighting. Find a single block of wall, freestanding,
and lure your enemy to it. When both you and your eneny are standing
next to the pillar, hit him, and then move so that you are opposite the
pillar from him. He will use his turn to move so that he's standing
next to you. Hit him again, and then move again. Repeat until he's
dead. Note that some monsters move eratically, and cannot be relied
upon to move in the method expected. Also, some monsters (mostly
Ghosts) can move through walls, and a small number of monsters can
chew through walls.
 
Shoot'n Scoot. Requires a large room, Phase Door, and some type of
missile weapon. Stand at one end of the room, your enemy at the other.
Fire your missile weapon at him until he gets close, and then Phase
Door. Fire again, until he gets close, and repeat. By the time you run
out of ammunition, he should be dead or weak enough for you to finish
him HTH (Hand to Hand).
 
Hack'n Back. Requires that you be at least twice as fast as your
opponent. Stand next to your enemy, hit him, and back up. He should use
his turn to move towards you instead of using a missile weapon or a
spell. Hit him again, back up again, repeat. This is a little more
dangerous than Pillardancing, because the monster gets a chance to
breathe or cast a spell, but it's easier to set up.
 
Wail'n Bail. Requires Teleport items. Fight the monster until you're
almost dead, teleport out, find him, and resume fighting. This is
dangerous, because you could teleport right next to some nasty that
will kill you. Also, it is not generally useful for killing unique
monsters, as they regenerate damage very quickly, and by the time you
find them again, they will have healed what you did to them.
 
The Anti-Summoning Corridor. Required a little time to set up. This can
be done just about anywhere. Dig a twisting corridor into the rock, and
station yourself at one end of it. When your opponent arrives, he won't
be able to summon any monsters next to you. This is a very important
technique for fighting many higher-end monsters which very quickly
bring in a horde of other monsters.
 
=== On Places on the Internet ===

There are tons of sites you can visit on the Internet. There is,
however, a fair amount of duplication, and almost every site has links
to the other ones. The major ones are

The Official Angband Website: http://www.phial.com/angband

Thangorodrim (home of Zangband): http://thangorodrim.angband.org/

The Angband Variants Page: http://wkweb5.cableinet.co.uk/bablos/angband/

Angband Junk Page: http://www-personal.umich.edu/~mhgraham/Angband/

The Zangband Knowledge Base: http://home.pacific.net.sg/~jianson/

The Angband FTP site: ftp://export.andrew.cmu.edu

There is also an Angband newsgroup at rec.games.roguelike.angband 
 
 
=== On the Variants of Angband ===

Since the Angband code is so easy to read after Ben Harrison, the
current maintainer, cleaned it up, many people have created variants of
Angband (note that the base Angband game, from which most variants are
made, is called Vanilla Angband, or just Vanilla). They add whatever
they want to, and then put the games on the Internet for people to play
and comment on. There is a Variants FAQ posted regularly at
rec.games.roguelike.angband which discusses all variants in more depth
than this section. The current major variants (obtainable at
ftp://export.andrew.cmu.edu or http://thangorodrim.angband.org/) are:

Zangband: the most prolific variant, based on the works of Zelazny's
Chronicles of Amber (hence the Z), adding a slew of items, monsters,
races, classes, vaults, and a healthy degree of silliness. Some people
consider it more difficult than Vanilla Angband (the base game, from
which most variants are made), but most people who make it to the
higher levels consider it easier. I recommend against playing Zangband
until you can reliably get a character to level 30 without cheating;
if you can't, you'll spend a lot of time dying in Zangband. 

Cthangband: A subvariant of Zangband that has wandered far from its
origins, Cthangband is a variant based on the various Lovecraftian
horrors (Cthulu, Nyarlathotep, et cetera). The author liked Zangband 
but objected to the fact that the all-but-omnipotent Lovecraftian
creatures had to take backstage to the Amberite uniques. In the process
of fixing this, he removed all of the "silly" elements of Zangband,
along with all Amber references. He also added a wilderness system,
with multiple towns and dungeons, many with guardians at the bottom.
Finally, he changed the speed system: movement speed and attack speed
were seperated. Movement speed works the way it does in any other
variant, but attacks now are each keyed in seperately. Based on you
number of attacks per round, each attack takes a certain fraction of a
round. The same thing was done to monsters. The basic idea behind this
is to give characters more of a chance when a monster breathes some
high-powered weapon. Instead of being subjected to more attacks
afterwards, most characters will have time to react: drink a potion,
cast a spell, or teleport out.

Kangband: adds to the game without disrupting balance. Kangband adds
quests, a wilderness level, a few new races and classes, and a few
items. It is much closer to Vanilla than Zangband is, and a new player
can easily understand it. It also stays truer to the Tolkein theme than
Zangband does.

Kamband: a fun variant which came from Kangband. Not too balanced,
decently difficult in a die-quickly kind of way, and a lot of fun to
play. Adds a lot of new races/classes including the Death Mold, the
Leprechaun, Mimics, and more. The original idea was a post-apocalyptic
Angband, with the Mutant as a race and the Corrupted as a class, but
the game has branched greatly since then. (Note: Kamband is apparently
dead.

Pernband: a still-young variant which attempts to add elements of
McCathrey's Pern series. Highly volatile; each new version typically
adds about 15-20 major changes and hundreds of minor ones. This variant
is remniscent of Kamband in that it adds huge numbers of features with
little concern for balance. However, this tends not to matter quite as
much as in other Angband variants; in PernAngband, the fun is in
exploring the new features, not in a satisfying battle against evil.
PernAngband is a variant of Zangband, but looks little like its older
sibling; it has modified just about everything that already exists in
the base game while adding everything else. 

Oangband: Opinion Angband was created to address some perceived
problems with Angband. The combat system underwent radical changes and
was simplified, but it is very different and takes some adjustment. For
instance, warriors are better off wielding large weapons instead of
small ones-the base damage dice are what count, not the number of
attacks. Many of the combat techniques in this text no longer work.
Several classes and many spells were added, and there are other changes
and additions. However, the Tolkein aspects of the game remain. If you
get used to the combat system in other variants, you'll have trouble
adjusting to Oangband's system, and vice versa. However, once you
understand Oangband melee, it makes much more sense than the other
variants.

Sangband (Skills Angband): Instead of advancing skills as you gain
levels, in this variant you apply your experience to various skills,
like Swordmanship, Magic Using, Weaponsmithing, et cetera. Also, there
is no longer a player class; "class" is determined by the types of
skills you choose to develope. You could be a brutish swordsman /
weaponsmith, a mediocre druid/archer, a Vanilla-style mage, or just
about anything else. A few new races were added, along with new
monsters and items. This game is still in developement, and alternates
between very abusable and very difficult.
 
 
For anyone who's read this far, feel free to use this, modify it,
repost it, etc. Good luck, and KILL MORGOTH! (If only I could write my
term paper on Angband).

--
Original : Chris Weisiger
Version  : 1.6.2 (updated 9/15/99)